[Music]
our guest is journalist and writer John
dingus John dingus is co-author of
assassination on Embassy Row the book
about the Orlando Letelier assassination
his articles on Central America appear
with frequency in the Washington Post
the nation the progressive and other
periodicals welcome to Boulder and to
kgn you John thank you David it's good
to be here when the Reagan
administration came to power in January
1981 rather suddenly and abruptly it
seemed that the focus of u.s. foreign
policy shifted to these small Central
American states in particular El
Salvador we heard a lot about a putative
Soviet hit list that the dominoes that
were once constructed in Laos Cambodia
Vietnam and Thailand were now in
Nicaragua El Salvador Guatemala Honduras
what is your perspective on that what
why the sudden focus on Central America
well I think they focused on Central
America because the Central Americans
drew the focus there what's happening in
Central America is not the figment of
anybody's imagination it is an ongoing
revolt right now there are armed
conflicts going on in three countries if
you look at it from Reagan's point of
view and actually we should start with
the Carter administration's point of
view because they're the ones that
started the military aid the perceived
threat to their view of the world is
that Nicaragua became a country that no
longer was unquestionably in the u.s.
camp it became independent the Reagan
administration chose to interpret that
independence from youth from u.s.
domination as hostility I think that's a
mistaken point of view but that
certainly I'm not the one calling the
at the State Department the difference
between the Reagan perspective and the
Carter perspective I think is that the
Reagan that the Carter people saw the
problems in Central America is largely
indigenous but they were very frightened
by them and when push came to shove in
El Salvador they put in their money and
guns on the side of the right-wing
military just as every American
administration is done in this century
so the effect of the Carter policy
wasn't that much difference
despite the human rights rhetoric and
things like that all both
administrations have justified their
policy in Central America as promoting a
some kind of a centrist solution I think
that was a more persuasive argument
under Carter when you did have a land
reform that was in place and promoted by
the United States in El Salvador and a
number of other reforms and you did have
a civilian component to the government
that was at least arguably centrist the
Reagan administration then has changed
this focus not in who they're supporting
but in attributing the problem in
Central America entirely to the effect
that it has on us Soviet relations so
that Central America becomes not a
Central American problem or the problem
of an America of a large country and
it's and its satellites but it becomes a
problem on the geopolitical scale and
when that happens if you interpret all
of the problems going on in Central
America all the revolts only in their
relevance to us Soviet world
confrontation the result is that you end
up making all of the indigenous problems
in Central America irrelevant to your
analysis you may say they're true
there's there's poverty in Central
America there's injustice but that's not
relevant because the important thing is
what happens in the global confrontation
and that basically is is what I think
the tragedy of Central America is
because Nicaragua which basically is a
struggling country coming out of a
tragic four or five-year confrontation
and civil war that culminated in the
victory of a leftist government but
still the basic problem of Nicaragua is
economic development and and poverty
it's a very small struggling country and
now all of a sudden they're on the
center stage is somehow this this threat
to US interests when actually as far as
I can see Nicaragua wants to get around
about the business of developing its
country and and emerging from the
poverty and underdevelopment that
they've been in for all these years
there's been much speculation and many
reports about a so-called US directed
destabilization program in Nicaragua
supposedly that there there are some Oh
sisters training in Honduras supposedly
there are attacks across the border we
hear reports of bridges being blown up
do you have any information on that yeah
I have a little bit I haven't been to
that area I was there in earlier in the
year and wrote a story about the
Mosquito Indians being evacuated from
the villages along the Koko River which
makes it which is the border between
Honduras and Nicaragua and that's the
the hot spot that's where all the
fighting is going on according to some
reports I just received the the rate of
fighting has stepped up considerably in
the last few months there have been
approximately the Nicaraguan say that
there have been 500 people killed in the
fighting in that area in the past year
so it's really now what's going on it's
not simply it's a combination of things
it's very complicated problem that area
is is very sparsely populated it's one
of the most unattractive parts of
Central America view as you probably
know Central America basically faces
South all the population centers are on
the Pacific and on the Atlantic side or
the Caribbean side depending on how you
measure the Caribbean you have the kind
of devil
island swampy tropical unpleasant
terrain and that's the area very few
there's no industrial centers no large
cities that's the area inhabited by the
mosquito Indians now the soul sista
former National Guardsmen have also set
up bases across the border with the
cooperation of the Hondurans obviously
otherwise they wouldn't be able to do it
and have joined forces with some of the
mosquito leaders and that that is really
that mixture it is very volatile and the
result is very violent it involves an
ethnic problem with a political problem
and then you throw in the into the
equation whatever the United States is
doing now the reports of covert activity
I think are no longer in the category of
secret it's it's been it's been written
about by authoritative publications
including the post the reports haven't
been denied and in Washington when that
happens you basically consider it to be
confirmed not simply because somebody
says they won't comment on it but
because they kind of wink and nod and
say well you know we really can't say
that this is going on but you know
that's kind of in line with with what
our thinking is many people think that
the reports of the covert action were
leaked with the purpose of getting this
out on the table so that people would no
longer when it was actually underway
there would not be no great discovery
and denunciation of the u.s. role there
it would kind of come out in dribs and
drabs and the other thing that the
United States is doing in that area is
holding military maneuvers together with
the Honduran troops and that is very
public one of the big maneuvers is going
to occur now in December
it's the largest maneuvers that have
gone on in that area and this this these
maneuvers are happening right smack in
the area of the conflict between the so
mestizos with the mosquitos the
cross-border conflicts
so the mixture is very is very volatile
what is the aim what is the goal of US
policy in Nicaragua is it to overthrow
the government there or is that that
hasn't been defined perhaps well it
doesn't get defined in terms of
overthrowing somebody's government the
United States is is fairly cautious
about what it says publicly although I
think this administration is as in this
way as honest as any in more or less
saying what they intend to do the United
States has said we don't rule out armed
force to to deal with the problem of
Nicaragua they've made demands in the
Nicaraguan government that any that any
sovereign government would have to say
are an incursion into their sovereignty
they've they've set down conditions for
how to run their economy it's pretty
obvious that the United States is trying
to or I should say the Reagan
administration is trying to rid itself
of what they see is a soft spot in what
has traditionally been a solidly
American area pro-american area now
whether or not they can do that or not
and whether or not this is even an
effective way to go about bringing about
an if such an effect is is a very open
question and of course many people many
observers including most of the Carter
Administration people who were kind of
sitting in the bleachers and and sniping
at this policy are pointing out that the
effect of all of this belligerency on
the part of the United States is simply
to get the backup of the Nicaraguans to
strengthen the hardliners there to
increase their dependence on on Cuba and
the Soviet Union greatly because they
simply are in such an economic bind that
they have to go somewhere and that the
ultimate result of this isn't is not
that the Nicaraguans want to become
another Cuba but that they will have no
other choice but to become an eye
isolated socialist bloc nation I don't
think that that's going to happen but I
think that's kind of an obvious
consequence of this kind of a policy you
mentioned the phrase another Cuba and
when Salvador Allende was elected as
president of Chile in September of 1970
Whichard Nixon was reported as saying
that he didn't want another Cuba in this
hemisphere what what does that mean what
is the perception of another Cuba
well Cuba was the first time that a
Latin American country became
independent of the US sphere there were
a number of tragic events included in
that those first few years including and
especially the Cuban Missile Crisis of
which we're now celebrating the 20th
anniversary the so it's not I think you
should look at it from two points of
view one is from the point of view of
Cuba they say this is the first
liberated territory in America by
America they mean South America Latin
America it's the first country to
successfully extract itself from the
u.s. fear now whether that had to be
such a conflict between a small country
in the big country and whether it had to
be this unmitigated hostility over the
years is an open question but it
certainly it became that as the United
States financing an invasion of their
country as we went to the brink of
nuclear war supposedly over the over the
Missile Crisis as the Soviets went in
basically convinced the Cubans to do
some things that I don't think were very
prudent from the from the Cubans point
of view all of this thing kind of
involved defined what Cuba means for the
United States and then of course you
have I think propagandistic aliy a big
problem but really a very small problem
of Cuba's demonstration effect for the
rest of Latin America because they were
no bones about it they were very happy
that they've conducted a revolution they
were very happy that they were
reorganizing society along different
lines and they were always willing to
explain what they were doing and to give
anybody else
the key to what they had done and so
many countries in Latin America had
indigenous revolutionary groups that
pattern themselves on the Cuban
experiment incidentally most of those
groups over the ten years following the
Cuban Revolution those that tried armed
uprisings all failed
which is a good lesson in to demonstrate
the the old maxim that you that
revolution in one country is not
necessarily a model for revolution in
another country that they all have to be
adapted and so when they tried to kind
of mechanically imitate the the Cuban
model in these various countries all of
them failed the Central Americans very
significantly have not attempted to
model themselves at all on the way the
Cubans did it they've done it there
their whole military tactic their whole
organizational structure their
relationship to political parties and
mass organizations is all totally
different from the Cuban but when the
United States says they want another
they want to avoid another Cuba what
they mean with various degrees of
belligerency is that they want to avoid
another country becoming independent
from the United States sphere and more
specifically they want to avoid and I
think this is a legitimate concern that
they want to avoid another country going
into the Soviet sphere of influence as
Cuba was but I think it's a false it's a
false concern because if you really
learn to live with the first namely an
independent country one that is not
doing bowing and genuflecting to the
United States at every step like the
dictatorships tend to do if you accept
the existence of independent democratic
pluralist countries which include
leftist as well
centrist and rightist ideologies then
you don't have to worry about a
latin-american country going into
anybody's sphere of influence except the
Latin American sphere of influence and
so I think when they I think it's kind
of a red herring some very red herring
when they talk about another Cuba all
the time the United States has
traditionally and I don't think this is
at all controversial enjoyed a
tremendous hegemony in Latin America and
Central America specifically the so
called
banana republics does the Reagan
administration feel that hegemony is now
threatened by movements for social
change I'd like you to address that as
one part of the question and the second
part what what are the components of
hegemony what does that mean when a
nation has another nation within its
sphere of influence what are the
economic and political and military
components of that well a lot of pen has
been a lot of ink has been expended on
that explaining that idea of dependency
I think it's interesting to pose it from
this point of view what would the United
States do if a movement for social
change arose in a latin-american country
that had demonstrably no connection of
any sort with any socialist black
country in other words what if there was
really no way you could say this is all
directed from Havana and this is all
being manipulated from Moscow would the
United States support radical social
change
land reform reorganization of the
economy disenfranchisement of the PIO of
the of the class in these economies that
has been traditionally arrogating to
itself the enormous shares of wealth
that is typical of these countries I
think the answer is obvious the United
States of course would not support that
that kind of revolution the United
States has never supported any kind of
revolution except our own to a certain
extent
that really wasn't a that we gather
muted initially as well yeah that was a
revolution against the colonial power
and and not certainly didn't change the
economic structure of the country so
very very much this is not I think the
United States has two goals in Latin
America one is to preserve its status as
a great power and if we can't preserve
it in this part of the world we're not
going to preserve it anywhere we don't
have a chance to do anything in Pakistan
and India and and Iran areas where we at
one time or another thought that we had
some influence if we can't keep keep the
house in order in in Central America and
the second thing is and that is tied up
also with some legitimate military
characteristics because we can't be
naive about the fact that there was
World War two when this when there was
penetration by German submarines into
the into the South Atlantic into the
Caribbean there are from a strictly
military point of view there are things
that you can understand why the military
people are concerned about making sure
that you don't have Soviet bases right
in in Cuba where there are in fact or or
in Central America but I don't think
that's really the issue the real issue
that and the second thing the United
States attempts to do in its relations
with the Central America and South
American countries is to maintain those
countries as a kind of assured economic
field for for trade it I don't think
that should be over emphasized because I
don't think I used to think ten years
ago when a lot of this started a lot of
the thinking started about dependency
and relay economic relations that that
was kind of what was happening in Chile
for
example the large companies the ITT was
directly involved in the the plots to
destabilize a yen D and it seemed that
this was a typical example of of the
multinational corporations big business
in alliance with the US government to
put down a revolution in Central America
you it's hard to find this big company
influence I think it's a more general
sort of economic sphere of activity that
the United States wants to preserve and
they want to make sure that that that
there are no there are no radical
experiments going on there and so it's
it's it's kind of subtle and I think
there's a lot of psychology a big power
psychology involved simply the idea of
how can you tolerate anybody escaping
the norm of alignment with the United
States of alliance with the United
States and and the tragic thing is that
we have defined pro-american almost in
terms in anti-democratic terms the
countries that we have the best
relations with are the countries that
are the least democratic I mean with the
US government not with the US people and
the ones that are the most universally
and absolutely in our camp that always
vote with us in the United Nations are
the dictatorships not the democracies
and so it it's evident from the Latin
American point of view that what the
what the United States influence means
is not to to promote democracy and human
rights and people's advancement but just
the opposite to keep change from
occurring to keep democracy from
flourishing and to to keep the
dictatorships in place and I think that
that perception is very tragic see you
do seem to suggest that the economic
factor the multinational factor in
Central America is not as important as
perhaps some psychological factors the
need for the United States to keep its
traditional backyard very neat and
well-defined so that it can maneuver
with a greater flexibility and greater
effectiveness in West Asia South Asia
and the Far East
well I'd and that's kind of far-fetched
right I mean even in expressing it it's
obvious or it seems obvious that how can
what has what what is happening in
Central America have that much of an
effect on what goes on between Iraq and
Iran or in the Middle East or or
Cambodia and Laos and Vietnam I mean
what how can you possibly create the
Rube Goldberg machine that allows the
cause down in Central America to have an
effect in these other parts of the world
but yet that is the argument that is
made that somehow the world is such a
small place that anything that happens
to affect us interest us dominance in
Central America is immediately going to
weaken us in other areas which we define
is even more important I think Hague's
mistake was in defining Central America
as the test case against the Soviet
Union because first of all the
connection between the Soviet Union and
Central America is so slim even if you
accept all of the evidence that the
administration has come out with the
white paper and so on which of course
are in many in many ways questioned by
people including some of my own writing
even if you accept that as given the
evidence is very slim that there is any
direct Soviet plan or even interest in
Central America other than what is
obvious and that is that they're very
happy whenever the United States has
troubles with its
closest neighbors but to to create this
kind of world machine in which the the
parts interact in this kind of
contraption fashion I think is pretty
far-fetched the operative vocabulary if
you'll excuse the Watergate ease that
seems to characterize and inform u.s.
foreign policy in Central America seem
to revolve around four or five key words
terror order security stability what is
the dynamic in US policy that either
permits it or pulls it to align itself
with the oligarchs and the military
cliques in those countries do you accept
my excel assumption that there is a
dynamic alright and that there's that
there is this identification I don't I
wish there was a reasonable way to
explain why this always happens it does
always happen we always end up on the
side of the dictators if we've got a
choice even between a dictator and a
democracy
sometimes we line ourselves up with a
dictator as was the case in Chile where
we were we overthrew a democratically
elected government in I guess
the reason is simply that the United
States views these latin-american
countries not as cultures not as groups
of people and populations not as for
instance the way we view California or
Iowa or a state that is part of the
United States we don't view them as
entities that have existence and rights
on their own that is equivalent to our
rights we view them as as cogs in our
own machine and the cogs are dispensable
and there are alternatives that if you
if you can't accomplish your ends
through one country you accomplish your
ends through another country you you
play one country off against another if
that serves your purpose and in this
mechanistic sort of attitude toward
toward countries in South America in
which you're more interested in using
them than in helping them you are
looking the rationality is to look for
the most efficient machine and the most
efficient machine is the anti-communist
absolutist totalitarian dictatorships
the administration tries to use the term
authoritarian as if there was some
difference between authoritarian and
totalitarian but if you look at a
society like Chile in which there is
total control of the press and total
control of ideas and total control of
the universities it certainly doesn't
distinguish itself in any real way that
I can imagine from from the countries a
brand as totalitarian all of which are
socialist soon it seems to me the only
difference is in fact that socialist
dictatorships versus capitalist
dictatorships and these dictatorships
are very dependable in a sense they
there's only one person you have to deal
with if you either got him in your
pockets
a bribe or through his political
alignment through the military you have
hierarchical set ups you get a decision
made at the top where together with the
United States it gets carried out all
the way through the bottom you don't
have any messy congress's you don't have
any public opinion to worry about you
don't have to worry about a dissenting
press you don't have to worry about
anybody standing in the way of of the
accomplishment of US goals once you have
these dictators on your side
so from from that way of looking at it
it's much more useful to the United
States to support dictators and to deal
with democracies the case of Chile in
the history of the last couple of
decades in Latin American politics is
very instructive the Chilean model was
one of peaceful change through the
democratic process and that was
violently over turned in September of
1973 do you think that event has
informed and discouraged movements for
peaceful social change in Central
America by all means that that's a
that's a really good point to to make
Chile was a model by the way that the
communist parties around Latin America
had been promoting for a long time it
kind of goes into the history of the
Popular Front even in the 1930s the
anti-fascist alliances of of centrist
parties and leftist parties that that
even became the government of many
countries it's kind of that idea namely
that you can accomplish that there is so
much in common
between middle class small business and
the left who want to to convert society
into something more equitable that you
can form an actual parliamentary type
majority to bring about the change and
in Chile
they carried this through with a with
some variations but basically they were
they were committed to the idea of doing
it legally preserving all the legalities
whenever they wanted to change something
and change the system they had to go
through either finding a clause in the
law that allowed them to stretch it or
anything like that but it was always it
was really a non revolutionary concept
because a revolution is that is the idea
of overturning a system in creating
another system but they were trying to
preserve the system and make it work to
redress the inequities in the society
now when whether or not that would have
worked and it certainly had lots of
problems in itself the fact that it was
overthrown violently and brutally with
the help of the United States was a
tremendous lesson to Latin Americans who
were number one inclined to view the
United States as something that they had
to deal with there's always a great deal
of sympathy toward the United States as
Americans get along with Latins for some
reason despite all of the cultural
differences and things like that
Americans like being in Latin America
people fall in love with Latin America
Americans do Latin Americans come up
here and they feel very good they they
like this country despite all of the
political tensions between the two
cultures when Chile was when IND was
overthrown the Latin American left went
back and forth about saying well the
parliamentary experiment didn't work
because we really didn't give it a
chance to work and the more extreme
leftist said it didn't work because it's
flawed to start with you can't change
society through legal means through
parliamentary means the debate went on
over the 1970s it became irrelevant in
fact the alternative of the IND
experiment had been closed out
it wasn't a matter of deciding
theoretically whether you could do it
parliamentary or you could do it through
armed struggle in fact the only
alternatives were to to take up arms and
that and the first time that it happened
was in Nicaragua when the Nicaraguan
people coalesced around the Sunday and
Easter movement which in fact was a very
small movement as you know and overthrew
Somoza it wasn't a matter of having a
choice
the Chilean experiment had been closed
it wasn't just Chile in the 1970s all of
the democracies that existed in Latin
America were ended all of the
opportunities to to carry out change
through legal means were aborted and so
there was in fact after Chile no
possibility of doing anything but the
kinds of revolutions that are going on
in Central America right now has
anything changed since the dismissal
resignation of Alexander Haig and maybe
you could talk a little bit about Thomas
Enders who's the Assistant Secretary of
State for Latin American affairs and
Jean Kirkpatrick who's the UN ambassador
who's who's sort of formulating the
policy or is it just a continuation of
the Haig policy it's hard to say in any
positive sense because Shultz has never
addressed any issues on on Latin America
or Central America since he's been in
office that silence if you want to be in
the Tea Leaf reading business is also
significant Haig very quickly after he
came into power his secretary of state
began to bluster and blather about
Central America and didn't lose an
opportunity in all of his speeches to
make the point that Central America is
what we're looking at that we're going
to have a quick victory there we're
going to show the Soviet Union that they
can't fool around here I think what they
intended to do was get a quick victory
to show that the Vietnam syndrome had
ended that the United States would would
back up its anti communist allies and
that it could win that the that the the
wavering hand of the Democrats and the
Liberals had undermined us resolve and
that they were going to turn that around
by the time that Haig was replaced by
Shultz I think he was already clear that
that policy had failed that there was no
quick victory in Central America they
hadn't turned around the guerrilla
struggle in El Salvador Nicaragua if
anything was more of a problem than
before and in fact you had an upsurge of
fighting in Guatemala so the situation
that they had expected to go in and and
put into order was in fact more
complicated and much messier at the end
of toward the end of nineteen her mid
eighteen nineteen eighty-two than it was
when he when he first started talking
about it so now Schultz has come in he
hasn't talked about it the effect of
that is to leave policy in abeyance in
other words it means no change in policy
at least publicly no change but in the
process of stalemate you wonder what the
policy is because since the policy was
predicated on a kind of quick victory a
quick victory that has not come about
then it was predicated on elections in
El Salvador which would kind of give the
legitimacy to the government that it
didn't have before and that has kind of
only been a half victory you wonder what
is going on because policy is always
never like the Ten Commandments policy
is something that adapts to
circumstances circumstances arrive and
the policy is either applied to it or
you come up with a new policy
to deal with the present circumstances
what has happened in Central America is
that the circumstances have changed and
we don't have a new policy we're again
in the situation of having to to catch
up to events and since Shultz has been
in you don't notice it so much because
there hasn't been a lot of publicity
about Central America because in part
because the State Department isn't
talking about it in part because there
isn't a lot of big events going on there
they're significantly different but in
fact the situation has deteriorated for
the United States moving away from the
the scenario that they had put out for
it and it calls in it calls out for a
policy statement and that policy
statement is not forthcoming know what
policy there is is being enunciated by
Thomas Enders Jean compact by the way
has not said anything on Central America
or Latin America for some time I can't
remember the last time but it might have
been even her trip to Chile which caused
quite a bit of controversy I don't think
she said anything really significant
about well there were some debates in
the Security Council about Nicaragua but
basically that's it about covert action
she hasn't taken a leading role in Latin
American policy in 1982
so that leaves it to Ender's Ender's is
a man who doesn't know anything about
Latin America except what he has gotten
from his briefer since he has been put
in charge of Latin American policy the
the effect of that is to in fact his
expertise is in Southeast Asia
he was in charge of the secret bombing
of Cambodia run out of the US Embassy
now what this means is that policy is is
being formulated by people whose focus
is on the Soviet Union and on
geopolitics rather than on Central
America and on the facts of the case
down there and so what
if you read under speeches
you have to glean basically from them
the present state of US policy and what
you get is a slight scaling down of the
belligerent rhetoric that Hague was
famous for Landers is saying more or
less the same thing but he's not saying
it in such confrontational style and I
you know I've always perceived Enders as
as being more or less on the moderate
side of the equation in the Reagan
administration that may cause you to
raise your eyebrows but that compared to
some of the other people who are known
to be influential on latin-american
policy Vernon Walters for example the
former deputy director of the CIA who
was included in many pages in my book
Bob McFarland a pentagon type whose
chief adviser on Latin America these
people really see military solutions is
the only way to go the diplomacy and
negotiations are totally ruled out so
Anders has always emphasized that
politics is one of the alternatives we
have to look at we have to look for
political solutions we have to he's I
think responsible for the kind of
regional approach to sent to the Central
American problem trying to bring in
other countries like Colombia they try
to bring even Venezuela in Mexico
although Mexico and Venezuela don't play
the game very much trying to to loosen
up the equation a little bit so that
there are some eternal alternatives to
simply going in there with more guns and
more machines and putting down these
indigenous rebellions the Schultz by the
way has made a one speech in private to
a group of Latin American leaders in
Washington about two weeks ago a newly
created body called the Latin American
forum Latin American dialogue I guess
started by solving wits and some and
ASSA and in that speech to this group of
kind of blue-ribbon Latin American
leaders I got a I talked to some people
to find out what he had said and and it
was interesting that he didn't mention
anything about the Soviet Union or Cuba
directly he made one veiled reference to
some sort of global interference but
basically that wasn't his point his
point was the economies of the of Latin
America are in trouble we have to think
of some imaginative solutions the United
States he emphasized the the basic
points of the United States the basic
values of the United States that they
share with Latin America democracy and
and free enterprise and things like that
in other words he emphasized the areas
which really in the long run certainly
are that the material for debate between
the United States and Latin America but
are not the material for conflict and so
he seemed to back off very much in that
private talk from the confrontational
rhetoric of hey I'm David Barsoomian and
my guest is John dingus
journalist and writer his co-author of
assassination on Embassy Row and we're
talking to John about Central and Latin
America fact those those geographical
terms are used interchangeably but when
one mentioned Central America
specifically what countries do we refer
to or do they refer to Central America
is a very small area it's it's Guatemala
El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua and Costa
Rica Panama is officially considered to
be part of even though it looks like
it's it's definitely the isthmus but
it's really considered to be part of
South America because historically it
was it was part of Colombia greater
Colombia and was split off around the
turn of the century so that we could
build our canal there
but it's not considered in any of the
statistics you get on South America
Central America Panama is a part well as
it should be because it's its economy
relates indifferent doesn't relate to
the rest of the Central American
countries and in the way the other ones
do to each other and there's a there was
at one time a Central American common
market Central America by the way right
after independence from Spain was one
country there was an attempt to create
Central America many of the countries El
Salvador for example on its license
plates has the slogan or the
identification of not just El Salvador
but El Salvador in Central America
in other words it's almost like saying
you know that it's almost identifying it
as long as a state in a greater country
you know even though they're now all
independent the recent war between
England and Argentina over the Malvinas
of the Falkland Islands raised a very
interesting situation where Argentina
began to negotiate and talk with Cuba
doesn't that suggest that perhaps even
in those ironclad relationships that the
United States has with military hunters
in Latin America that when it comes down
to their own national interests they
will not hesitate to break out of u.s.
hegemonic control yeah I think that
lesson should be applied both ways it
means not only that countries that are
supposedly so solidly anti-communist
like Argentina but also countries are
supposedly so pro-soviet like Cuba when
given the chance will exert their
independence because Latin Americans
have never been very successful at being
independent from the big powers but if
certainly stated that as their goal all
the time they they really it's it's
forms a major part of their literature
this kind of resentment at being so
dependent on the United States and it's
not just the United States that's
problem for for the Cubans it's a it's a
big problem of being overly dependent on
the Soviet Union they're very rested
they've made they've made so many
attempts to to bring about a
rapprochement with the United States and
which of course is is just simply I mean
there's no there's no question that rep
Rosemount with the United States means a
distancing from the Soviet Union and
that's that's been their goal for a long
time Argentina by the way is not has not
ever been completely lined up with the
United States and every way there there
have always been problems with Argentina
they've they've always seen themselves
as a part in in South America as more
sophisticated more European the famous
cases that Argentina really favored
Germany in the Second World War rather
than than the other
the Allies the tendency in Argentina is
Oh relations with the Soviet Union by
the way I've continued all during this
period which in which Argentina's had a
anti communist dictatorship so it's it's
never all that simple but the
interesting thing was that at the time
of the Malvinas crisis the United States
was launching a major approach to
Argentina to cement the series of packs
of agreements in various areas the most
important of which was Argentine
cooperation in fighting in Central
America and that was sabotage by by the
Malvinas conflict I don't I think it's
one of the the Malvinas thing was kind
of a comic war until it really became a
hot war but in terms of thinking about
in analyzing Latin America it gave I
think lots of arguments to those of us
who have always seen Latin America as
more Latin then then then polarized
between left
than right socialists block us block the
Latin America is simply not predictable
in geopolitical lines that you that
there are all these factors that are
that are indigenous to Latin America
that come into play whenever you get a
chance to change the equation somewhat
when you have a coin you have for
instance in this case colonialism a
factor then everybody reacts differently
you know they fought against they fought
against America's biggest ally England
and and everybody lined up behind the
Argentine's left and right because it
was because colonialism is more
important in the third world than is
socialism versus capitalism and and that
confounds the people who want to see the
whole world as being run either from
Moscow or from the United States
supposedly to mend some of those broken
fences that occurred with US support of
Britain during the Malvinas war
President Reagan is going to venture out
of the Oval Office and travel to several
Latin American countries I believe I
believe Brazil Colombia and Costa Rica
in there in the very near future why
don't we talk a little bit now
specifically country by country what's
happening in El Salvador and in
Guatemala both countries continue to be
in the news it seems that the the
escalation of violence in Guatemala
according to Amnesty International has
been very very dramatic since the new
Hunta under general Rios Montt took over
in March I believe it was have you been
to Guatemala recently yeah I was there
in July the in July was already obvious
that that massacres were occurring and
that there was a lot of there was a lot
of evidence I went into the the two
provinces were where the most of the
fighting is occurring kiichi and weight
and angle and I talked to church leaders
and I talked to a lot of army people -
well of course denied that any of this
is going on but the church people who
are actually out in these villages were
all of them had stories that were just
blood-curdling of what they had heard
about either seeing themselves directly
or heard from villagers coming into
their villages about army sweeps through
these areas obliterating whole villages
whole villages being uprooted and being
converted into refugees it's it's
extremely brutal and then the the
amnesty report was the was very
important because it brought out the in
a systematic way the documentation for
these for these charges the importance
is that that Rios Montt is being painted
as a moderate as somebody that is
improving the human rights situation and
it's a very depending on whether or not
he's doing it for deviously or or
whatever what he what is happening it's
being done very cleverly because the
places where all of the journalists are
the cities have indeed improved there
are the death squads of quit operating
in the cities the politicians are able
to maneuver even the dissident
politicians and they're able to they're
able to paint Guatemala know as a
country in which human rights are
respected more than they were ever in
the past or under the previous
government but in fact in the
countryside it's now I think clear that
the level of violence against the
Indians is even greater than it was
before it was pretty bad before but it
is not only continued but it is stepped
up as the army has stepped up its
offensive against the rebels
and what what is the political movement
indigenous political movement within
Guatemala for social change
well the Guatemala is unique in Central
America in that it's had a guerrilla
force opposition guerrilla force since
1960 so there's been almost continuous
existence of guerrilla movements and
fighting in at least half of those years
over the last 20 years so it's the
longest stretch of fighting in any of
these countries the second thing is that
for a variety of reasons starting with
the overthrow of President Arbenz in
1954 opposition you know in Guatemala
has been identified with the guerrilla
movements it hasn't been so much that
guerrilla movements start up as kind of
isolated out in the countryside but the
guerrillas really have been the
political expression of opposition as
well as the military expression
the reason the biggest reason for this
is that the Guatemalan military has been
so brutal so intolerant that there's
been no there's been no development of
politics above ground it's been
impossible to organize above ground and
so therefore you forced a wedding of
political and military in the opposition
movement that goes back 20 years one of
the effects of this is that the
guerrillas that the opposition people in
Guatemala are totally unknown nobody
knows who they are it's not like in
Chile where you had this enormous
popular public movement of the left that
even elected a president
and then was put down by military
dictatorship so you had the the military
had long lists of who the opposition
were you just had to find them you knew
who you knew all of the leaders down to
the down to the individual cells of all
of the political movements in the
country so and you even had pictures of
them I mean that the secret police work
done in Chile was facilitated by the
fact that all of these people had been
public political figures until the coup
in Guatemala they don't have any idea
who these people are because they're
twenty it's been going on for twenty
years there are people fighting against
the Guatemalan government that the last
time they appeared in public was in 1960
you and it means and of course not that
there are that many left you know who
have been in it for twenty years but it
means that the leadership has probably
undergone two or three turnovers since
the last time anybody knew anything
about them publicly and there's there's
very little it's very difficult to stop
a guerrilla movement if you know that
little about them you have that little
access to their leadership and they in
the last the guerrilla movement in
Guatemala was basically defeated
militarily around 1970 and has been in
quiescence until basically the last two
years this year the four movements the
four guerrilla groups joined a coalition
a unity organization with a program and
are now in the process of putting
together a political front organization
and so it's they're more or less
following in the steps of Nicaraguan El
Salvador and what is your assessment of
events in El Salvador there was of
course than much ballyhooed and
trumpeted election last spring that was
supposed to uh sure in a new era of
democracy and human rights in El
Salvador what has happened since that
election
well the elections were intended to
create the first step toward democratic
system in El Salvador to create a new
Constituent Assembly which had the which
in fact would be the government which
had the power to appoint the president
to elect a president what happened was
that the election was I think a success
in that it had a big turnout people I
think voted because they were they were
convinced that the well that this was a
solution that this perhaps would end the
violence and I think they've been
disappointed first of all the right-wing
one now that doesn't I mean obviously if
the elections were were true elections
and I don't think that there was any
rampant fraud then a lot of people voted
for these right-wing candidates for
reasons that you know maybe we'll
understand someday but it's difficult to
understand it certainly totally blew
apart all of the thinking in the United
States about in the United States
official in the government about what
should happen because we had been
promoting the idea that all the
moderates were gonna win the centrists
the the moderates being represented by
Jose Napoleon Duarte right the right
wing represented by Roberto de Basile
Dobis own right and the fact that Dobis
owns party in coalition with the other
the former military party the one whose
government had been overthrown in 1979
that they became the majority in the
Constituent Assembly has caused numerous
problems to the US scenario for first El
Salvador and one of the first things
they did was to attempt to dismantle the
agrarian reform which had an enormous
effect up in Congress and immediately
led to a gigantic aid reduction it just
hasn't gone according to plan and the
other problem was that the president
that ended up getting elected was not
somebody who had been active at all in
the election so none of the leaders
around whom political organization had
occurred before the election
showed up as president so there's no
real connection there's no way you can
argue that the president who is now
there Magana was elected he was somebody
who was brought in basically at the
behest of the United States to form some
sort of a compromise to deal with the
fact that we have basically of extreme
right-wing majority you know running El
Salvador so the country has moved vastly
to the right militarily the situation
has not far from improving it has
degenerated to a certain extent the
United States plan was that after the
elections the u.s. trained battalions
would be in place ready to go into
combat they would be effective and would
deal some major blows to the guerrillas
this would then allow the country to
once the guerrillas were reduced to
banditry the civilian government in
place would then proceed to stabilize
consolidate its power and you would you
know it would be the end of the conflict
basically instead the guerrillas have
shown the same kind of resilience that
they've always shown they've improved to
a certain extent their ability to strike
against the government forces the u.s.
trained units have gone into battle and
they haven't won and I think this leads
the United States policy and military
planners to to rethink the whole thing I
mean they they have to be thinking how
much more do we have to pour into that
country in order to gain a victory
there's no question about the guerrillas
threatening to win I don't think that
there's any possibility that they have
the military power to overthrow the
government it just seems to be going on
and on as this very long conflict and
and the guerrillas have signal their
weariness by by calling for negotiations
now our guest has been journalist and
writer John dingus he is co-author of
assassination on embassy row
his articles on Central America and
South America appear with frequency in
the Washington Post the nation that
progressive and other periodicals thank
you very much for joining us John
thanks molly but hemispheres I'm David
Barr Sonia thank you for listening
[Music]